your company launches a search for an
open position the applications start
rolling in and the qualified candidates
are identified now
the choosing begins person a Ivy League
4.0 flawless resume great
recommendations all the right stuff
person B state school fair amount a job
hopping and odd jobs like cashier and
singing waitress but remember both are
qualified so I ask you who are you going
to pick my colleagues and I created very
official terms to describe two distinct
categories of candidates we call a the
silver spoon the one who clearly had
advantages and was destined for a
success and we call B the scrapper the
one who had to fight against tremendous
odds to get to the same point you just
heard a human resources director refer
to people as silver spoons and scrappers
which is not exactly politically correct
and sounds a bit judgmental but before
my Human Resources certification gets
revoked
let me explain a resume tells a story
and over the years I've learned
something about people whose experiences
read like a patchwork quilt that makes
me stop and fully consider them before
tossing their resumes away a series of
odd jobs may indicate inconsistency lack
of focus unpredictability or it may
signal a committed struggle against
obstacles at the very least the scrapper
deserves an interview to be clear
here I don't hold anything against the
silver spoon getting into and graduating
from an elite University take a lot of
hard work and sacrifice but if your
whole life has been engineered towards
success how will you handle the tough
times one person I hired felt that
because he attended an elite university
there were certain assignments that were
beneath him like temporarily doing
manual labor to better understand an
operation eventually he quit but on the
flip side what happens when your whole
life is destined for failure and you
actually succeed I want to urge you to
interview the scrapper I know a lot
about this because I am a scrapper
before I was born my father was
diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia
and he couldn't hold the job in spite of
his brilliance our lives were one part
Cuckoo's Nest one part awakenings
and one part A Beautiful Mind I'm the
fourth of five children raised by a
single mother in a rough neighborhood in
Brooklyn New York we never owned a home
a car a washing machine and for most of
my childhood we didn't even have a
telephone so I was highly motivated to
understand the relationship between
business success and scrappers because
my life could easily have turned out
very differently as I met successful
business people and read profiles of
high-powered leaders I noticed some
commonality many of them had experienced
early hardships anywhere from poverty
abandonment death of a parent while
young to learning disabilities
alcoholism and violence the conventional
thinking has been that trauma leads to
distress and there's been a lot of focus
on the resulting dysfunction but
during studies of dysfunction data
revealed an unexpected insight that even
the worst circumstances can result in
growth and transformation a remarkable
and counterintuitive phenomenon has been
discovered which scientists call
post-traumatic growth in one study
designed to measure the effects of
adversity on children at risk among a
subset of 698 children who experienced
the most severe and extreme conditions
fully 1/3 grew up to lead healthy
successful and productive lives in spite
of everything and against tremendous
odds they succeeded one-third take this
resume this guy's parents give him up
for adoption he never finished his
college he job hops quite a bit goes on
a sojourn to India for a year and to top
it off he has dyslexia would you hire
the sky his name is Steve Jobs in a
study of the world's most highly
successful entrepreneurs it turns out a
disproportionate number have dyslexia in
the u.s. 35 percent of the entrepreneurs
study had dyslexia what's remarkable
among those entrepreneurs who experience
post-traumatic growth they now view
their learning disability as a desirable
difficulty which provided them an
advantage because they became better
listeners and paid greater attention to
detail they don't think they are who
they are
in spite of adversity they know they are
who they are because of adversity they
embrace their trauma and hardships as
key elements of who they've become and
know that without those experiences they
might not have developed the muscle and
grit required to become successful one
of my colleagues had his life completely
up and
as a result of the Chinese Cultural
Revolution in 1966 at age 13
his parents were relocated to the
countryside the schools were closed and
he was left alone in Beijing to fend for
himself until 16 when he got a job in a
clothing factory but instead of
accepting his fate he made a resolution
that he would continue his formal
education eleven years later when the
political landscape changed he heard
about a highly selective university
admissions test he had three months to
learn the entire curriculum of middle
and high school so every day he came
home from the factory took a nap studied
until 4:00 a.m. went back to work and
repeated the cycle every day for three
months he did it he succeeded his
commitment to his education was
unwavering and he never lost hope today
he holds a master's degree and his
daughters each have degrees from Cornell
and Harvard scrappers are propelled by
the belief that the only person you have
full control over is yourself when
things don't turn out well scrappers ask
what can I do differently to create a
better result scrappers have a sense of
purpose that prevent them from giving up
on themselves kind of like if you've
survived poverty a crazy father and
several muggings you figure business
challenges really piece of cake I got
this and that reminds me humor scrappers
know that humor gets you through the
tough times and laughter helps you
change your perspective and finally
there are relationships people who
overcome adversity don't do it alone
somewhere along the way they find people
who bring out the best in them and who
are invested in their
success having someone you can count on
no matter what is essential to
overcoming adversity I was lucky in my
first job after college I didn't have a
car so I carpooled across two bridges
with a woman who was the president's
assistant she watched me work and
encouraged me to focus on my future and
not dwell on my past along the way I've
met many people who provided me brutally
honest feedback advice and mentorship
these people don't mind that I once
worked as a singing waitress to help pay
for college I'll leave you with one
final valuable insight companies that
are committed to diversity and inclusive
practices tend to support scrappers and
outperform their peers
according to diversity Inc a study of
their top 50 companies for diversity
outperformed the S&P 500 by 25 percent
so back to my original question who are
you going to bet on silver spoon or
scrapper I say choose the underestimated
contender whose secret weapons are
passion and purpose hire the scrapper